Method Resolution
=================

Multiple dispatch selects the function from the types of the inputs.

.. code::

    @dispatch(int)
    def f(x):           # increment integers
        return x + 1

    @dispatch(float)
    def f(x):           # decrement floats
        return x - 1

.. code::

    >>> f(1)            # 1 is an int, so increment
    2
    >>> f(1.0)          # 1.0 is a float, so decrement
    0.0

Union Types
-----------

Similarly to the builtin ``isinstance`` operation you specify multiple valid
types with a tuple.

.. code::

    @dispatch((list, tuple))
    def f(x):
        """ Apply ``f`` to each element in a list or tuple """
        return [f(y) for y in x]

.. code::

    >>> f([1, 2, 3])
    [2, 3, 4]

    >>> f((1, 2, 3))
    [2, 3, 4]

Abstract Types
--------------

You can also use abstract classes like ``Iterable`` and ``Number`` in
place of union types like ``(list, tuple)`` or ``(int, float)``.

.. code::

    from collections import Iterable

    # @dispatch((list, tuple))
    @dispatch(Iterable)
    def f(x):
        """ Apply ``f`` to each element in an Iterable """
        return [f(y) for y in x]

Selecting Specific Implementations
----------------------------------

If multiple valid implementations exist then we use the most specific
one. In the following example we build a function to flatten nested
iterables.

.. code::

    @dispatch(Iterable)
    def flatten(L):
        return sum([flatten(x) for x in L], [])

    @dispatch(object)
    def flatten(x):
        return [x]

.. code::

    >>> flatten([1, 2, 3])
    [1, 2, 3]

    >>> flatten([1, [2], 3])
    [1, 2, 3]

    >>> flatten([1, 2, (3, 4), [[5]], [(6, 7), (8, 9)]])
    [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

Because strings are iterable they too will be flattened

.. code::

    >>> flatten([1, 'hello', 3])
    [1, 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', 3]

We avoid this by specializing ``flatten`` to ``str``. Because ``str`` is
more specific than ``Iterable`` this function takes precedence for
strings.

.. code::

    @dispatch(str)
    def flatten(s):
        return s

.. code::

    >>> flatten([1, 'hello', 3])
    [1, 'hello', 3]

The ``multipledispatch`` project depends on Python's ``issubclass``
mechanism to determine which types are more specific than others.

Multiple Inputs
---------------

All of these rules apply when we introduce multiple inputs.

.. code::

    @dispatch(object, object)
    def f(x, y):
        return x + y

    @dispatch(object, float)
    def f(x, y):
        """ Square the right hand side if it is a float """
        return x + y**2

.. code::

    >>> f(1, 10)
    11

    >>> f(1.0, 10.0)
    101.0

Ambiguities
-----------

However ambiguities arise when different implementations of a function
are equally valid

.. code::

    @dispatch(float, object)
    def f(x, y):
        """ Square left hand side if it is a float """
        return x**2 + y

.. code::

    >>> f(2.0, 10.0)
    ?

Which result do we expect, ``2.0**2 + 10.0`` or ``2.0 + 10.0**2``? The
types of the inputs satisfy three different implementations, two of
which have equal validity

::

    input types:    float, float
    Option 1:       object, object
    Option 2:       object, float
    Option 3:       float, object

Option 1 is strictly less specific than either options 2 or 3 so we
discard it. Options 2 and 3 however are equally specific and so it is
unclear which to use.

To resolve issues like this ``multipledispatch`` inspects the type
signatures given to it and searches for ambiguities. It then raises a
warning like the following:

::

    multipledispatch/dispatcher.py:74: AmbiguityWarning:
    Ambiguities exist in dispatched function f

    The following signatures may result in ambiguous behavior:
        [object, float], [float, object]


    Consider making the following additions:

    @dispatch(float, float)
    def f(...)

This warning occurs when you write the function and guides you to create
an implementation to break the ambiguity. In this case, a function with
signature ``(float, float)`` is more specific than either options 2 or 3
and so resolves the issue. To avoid this warning you should implement
this new function *before* the others.

.. code::

    @dispatch(float, float)
    def f(x, y):
        ...

    @dispatch(float, object)
    def f(x, y):
        ...

    @dispatch(object, float)
    def f(x, y):
        ...

If you do not resolve ambiguities by creating more specific functions
then one of the competing functions will be selected pseudo-randomly.
By default the selection is dependent on hash, so it will be consistent
during the interpreter session, but it might change from session to
session.
